README.md, before:

# 🚀 FalconEye – Prompt-Guided Intelligent Tracking Rover

FalconEye is a **product-oriented intelligent tracking system** designed for **real-time, robust object following** in dynamic environments.  
It enables users to specify a target using **clicks, reference images, or natural language**, and autonomously tracks and follows the target using a **vision–language perception pipeline**, **distractor-aware tracking**, and **closed-loop motion control** on edge hardware.

The system is optimized for **performance, deployability, and practical usability**, making it suitable for real-world robotics applications such as:

- Human-following robots  
- Mobile surveillance  
- Assistive robotics  
- Smart delivery & service robots  
- Autonomous companions  

---

## ✨ Key Features

- **Multi-modal target specification**
  - Click-based prompts (SAM)
  - Reference image prompts (CLIPSeg)
  - Natural language prompts (CLIPSeg)

- **Vision–Language Object Segmentation**
  - Open-vocabulary object grounding  
  - No task-specific retraining required  

- **Robust Real-Time Tracking**
  - Distractor-Aware Siamese Tracker (DaSiamRPN)  
  - Handles occlusion, clutter, and appearance changes  

- **Closed-Loop Motion Control**
  - Maintains target centering  
  - Regulates distance automatically  

- **Edge Deployment**
  - Runs on **Jetson AGX Xavier**
  - ~40 FPS real-time performance  

- **Product-Oriented Design**
  - Focus on stability, responsiveness, and real-world usability  
  - Modular, scalable architecture  

---

## 🧠 System Overview

FalconEye converts **user intent** into **persistent target tracking** using the following pipeline:
<img src="Documents/pipeline.png" width="700"/>

1. **User Prompt (Base Station)**  
   Click / Image / Text input  

2. **Object Segmentation**  
   - SAM for spatial clicks  
   - CLIPSeg for image/text prompts  

3. **Bounding Box Initialization**  
   Mask → Bounding box  

4. **Visual Tracking**  
   DaSiamRPN maintains target identity  

5. **Decision Module (Python)**  
   Computes steering & speed  

6. **Motion Control (C++)**  
   Low-latency motor execution  

7. **Autonomous Rover Movement**

The system ensures the target stays **centered in view** and at a **safe distance** during motion.

---

## 🏗️ Architecture

FalconEye uses a **distributed architecture**:

<img src="Documents/architecture_diagram.png" width="700"/>


### Base Station (Laptop)
- User interface  
- Prompt input (Click / Image / Text)  
- Target specification  

### Onboard Rover (Jetson AGX Xavier)
- Vision–Language Segmentation  
- Visual Tracking  
- Decision Making (Python)  
- Real-Time Motor Control (C++)  

This separation allows:
- Smooth user interaction  
- High-speed onboard processing  
- Reliable motion execution  

---

## ⚙️ Hardware & Software Stack
<img src="Documents/jetson.png" width="600"/>

### Hardware
- Jetson AGX Xavier (32GB)  
- Web Camera  
- Differential Drive Rover  
- Motor Controller  

### Software
- Python (Perception & Tracking)  
- C++ (Low-level Control)  
- OpenCV  
- PyTorch  
- SAM (Segment Anything)  
- CLIPSeg  
- DaSiamRPN  

---

## 📊 Performance

- **Real-time tracking:** ~40 FPS  
- **Stable under occlusion & clutter**  
- **Smooth motion control**  
- **Consistent target centering**  
- **Reliable distance regulation**  

The system prioritizes **responsiveness and robustness** over offline accuracy metrics, making it suitable for real-world deployment.

---

## 🎯 Product Focus

FalconEye is designed as a **performance-driven product prototype**, not just a research demo.

The emphasis is on:

- Real-time operation  
- Edge deployment  
- System stability  
- Practical usability  
- Modular design  
- Scalability for future features  

This makes FalconEye suitable for **commercial robotics use-cases** where reliability and responsiveness matter more than academic benchmarks.

---

## 🚧 Current Capabilities

- Prompt-based target selection  
- Real-time object tracking  
- Autonomous following  
- Distance control  
- Clutter & occlusion handling  

---

## 🛣️ Future Roadmap

- Long-term re-identification  
- Multi-target tracking  
- LiDAR-based obstacle avoidance  
- Voice-based navigation  
- Multi-camera fusion  
- Indoor & outdoor navigation  
- Cloud-based monitoring  

---

## 📌 Use Cases

- Human-following robots  
- Smart surveillance  
- Assistive mobility  
- Campus robots  
- Service robots  
- Autonomous companions  

---
## 📄 Technical Report

A detailed technical description of FalconEye is available here:  
[Read the full technical report](Documents/FalconEye_Research_Paper.pdf)

---

## 📖 References

- Kirillov et al., "Segment Anything", 2023  
- Lüdecke & Ecker, "CLIPSeg", CVPR 2022  
- Zhu et al., "DaSiamRPN", ECCV 2018  

---

## 👨‍💻 Author

**P. Varun Sai**  
Department of Computer Science & Engineering  
Keshav Memorial Institute of Technology  
Hyderabad, India

Commit message:

Added automatic tracking and added models in readme

README.md, after:

# 🚀 FalconEye – Prompt-Guided Intelligent Tracking Rover

FalconEye is a **product-oriented intelligent tracking system** designed for **real-time, robust object following** in dynamic environments.  
It enables users to specify a target using **clicks, reference images, or natural language**, and autonomously tracks and follows the target using a **vision–language perception pipeline**, **distractor-aware tracking**, and **closed-loop motion control** on edge hardware.

The system is optimized for **performance, deployability, and practical usability**, making it suitable for real-world robotics applications such as:

- Human-following robots  
- Mobile surveillance  
- Assistive robotics  
- Smart delivery & service robots  
- Autonomous companions  

---

## ✨ Key Features

- **Multi-modal target specification**
  - Click-based prompts (SAM)
  - Reference image prompts (CLIPSeg)
  - Natural language prompts (CLIPSeg)

- **Vision–Language Object Segmentation**
  - Open-vocabulary object grounding  
  - No task-specific retraining required  

- **Robust Real-Time Tracking**
  - Distractor-Aware Siamese Tracker (DaSiamRPN)  
  - Handles occlusion, clutter, and appearance changes  

- **Closed-Loop Motion Control**
  - Maintains target centering  
  - Regulates distance automatically  

- **Edge Deployment**
  - Runs on **Jetson AGX Xavier**
  - ~40 FPS real-time performance  

- **Product-Oriented Design**
  - Focus on stability, responsiveness, and real-world usability  
  - Modular, scalable architecture  

---

## 🧠 System Overview

FalconEye converts **user intent** into **persistent target tracking** using the following pipeline:
<img src="Documents/pipeline.png" width="700"/>

1. **User Prompt (Base Station)**  
   Click / Image / Text input  

2. **Object Segmentation**  
   - SAM for spatial clicks  
   - CLIPSeg for image/text prompts  

3. **Bounding Box Initialization**  
   Mask → Bounding box  

4. **Visual Tracking**  
   DaSiamRPN maintains target identity  

5. **Decision Module (Python)**  
   Computes steering & speed  

6. **Motion Control (C++)**  
   Low-latency motor execution  

7. **Autonomous Rover Movement**

The system ensures the target stays **centered in view** and at a **safe distance** during motion.

---

## 🏗️ Architecture

FalconEye uses a **distributed architecture**:

<img src="Documents/architecture_diagram.png" width="700"/>


### Base Station (Laptop)
- User interface  
- Prompt input (Click / Image / Text)  
- Target specification  

### Onboard Rover (Jetson AGX Xavier)
- Vision–Language Segmentation  
- Visual Tracking  
- Decision Making (Python)  
- Real-Time Motor Control (C++)  

This separation allows:
- Smooth user interaction  
- High-speed onboard processing  
- Reliable motion execution  

---

## ⚙️ Hardware & Software Stack
<img src="Documents/jetson.png" width="600"/>

### Hardware
- Jetson AGX Xavier (32GB)  
- Web Camera  
- Differential Drive Rover  
- Motor Controller  

### Software
- Python (Perception & Tracking)  
- C++ (Low-level Control)  
- OpenCV  
- PyTorch  
- SAM (Segment Anything)  
- CLIPSeg  
- DaSiamRPN  

---

## 📊 Performance

- **Real-time tracking:** ~40 FPS  
- **Stable under occlusion & clutter**  
- **Smooth motion control**  
- **Consistent target centering**  
- **Reliable distance regulation**  

The system prioritizes **responsiveness and robustness** over offline accuracy metrics, making it suitable for real-world deployment.

---

## 🎯 Product Focus

FalconEye is designed as a **performance-driven product prototype**, not just a research demo.

The emphasis is on:

- Real-time operation  
- Edge deployment  
- System stability  
- Practical usability  
- Modular design  
- Scalability for future features  

This makes FalconEye suitable for **commercial robotics use-cases** where reliability and responsiveness matter more than academic benchmarks.

---

## 🚧 Current Capabilities

- Prompt-based target selection  
- Real-time object tracking  
- Autonomous following  
- Distance control  
- Clutter & occlusion handling  

---

## 🛣️ Future Roadmap

- Long-term re-identification  
- Multi-target tracking  
- LiDAR-based obstacle avoidance  
- Voice-based navigation  
- Multi-camera fusion  
- Indoor & outdoor navigation  
- Cloud-based monitoring  

---

## 📌 Use Cases

- Human-following robots  
- Smart surveillance  
- Assistive mobility  
- Campus robots  
- Service robots  
- Autonomous companions  

---

## How to run
Download SAM model and keep it in models/ folder

**- Download the SAM model to ckpt folder for running the code**

1. SAM vit_b (default) : https://dl.fbaipublicfiles.com/segment_anything/sam_vit_b_01ec64.pth

2. SAM vit_l: https://dl.fbaipublicfiles.com/segment_anything/sam_vit_l_0b3195.pth

3. SAM vit_h: https://dl.fbaipublicfiles.com/segment_anything/sam_vit_h_4b8939.pth

**- Download DaSiamrpn model and keep it in models/ folder**
DaSiamRPN - https://drive.google.com/file/d/1G9GtKpF36-AwjyRXVLH_gHvrfVSCZMa7/view

then install requirements from requirements.txt
and run main.py

## 📄 Technical Report

A detailed technical description of FalconEye is available here:  
[Read the full technical report](Documents/FalconEye_Research_Paper.pdf)

---

## 📖 References

- Kirillov et al., "Segment Anything", 2023  
- Lüdecke & Ecker, "CLIPSeg", CVPR 2022  
- Zhu et al., "DaSiamRPN", ECCV 2018  

---

## 👨‍💻 Author

**P. Varun Sai**  
Department of Computer Science & Engineering  
Keshav Memorial Institute of Technology  
Hyderabad, India
